Welcome back, so in this meaty video we're going to
talk about protecting yourself from
bugs. We will break your whole game,
trace the bug we create via the console,
then discuss how we handle undefined
states and discuss isola...
isolating even and fixing bugs so let's
make an architectural decision,
score master already passes back there
in yellow a list of frames to game
manager so the simplest and most logical
thing to pass from game manager onto the
score display at the top right is the
list of frames and the list of pins and
then let score display handle the rest. Now
in the case of the list of frames that's
trivial, it just puts them in the right boxes
in the case of the list of pins score
displays got a similar amount of work to
do as score master or action master
because it could be anywhere between 13
and 21 different pin falls, so it's gotta
work out where to leave spaces an what
boxes to put it in, but before we solve that
problem, let's see what would happen if
we got that method wrong in score display
and how badly it could break the game, so I
want you to add a method to score to
school display dot cs, use the signature
there public void fill roll card, takes
in a list of integers of roles as we
just discussed. Call the message... method from
game manager before ball dot reset, you'll
obviously need to go and find your score
display and all that type of stuff at the start
and then make it error, for example in your
score display dot cs in your fill
roll card method, just say rolls bracket
minus one for example, try and access an
invalid element of the array or anything
to error out and then see what happens
and run the game see how badly broken the
whole execution flow of the game is and
then we'll work out why and learn some
really useful tools, so see you in a second
Cool, welcome back, so let's let's go ahead and
break our game. So in score display
we said we were gonna make a method called
public, cos we need to call it from
outside void fill roll card and then it takes
in a list which we don't have access to
so we do now as we have the generic
namespace a list of integers call rolls.
Fine, and then imagine that we make a
mistake in the production of this method,
it's not beyond belief that we could do
that
and that we try and index rolls minus one
equals one; it's just an invalid index,
could easily happen in a loop right that
we end up calling an invalid array index
and imagine worse that this only happens
one in a thousand games, there's only a few
handfuls of games that that happens in
imagine you missed it in your tests even if
you built this using test driven
development imagine you missed it, and out there
in your shipped game occasionally this
bug happens although of course it can
happen every time now because we're forcing
it to happen. So there they are, they're playing
away, all looks OK on the surface when they
start then they bowl... doesn't matter what
you do actually because whatever you do
we're gonna get problems if we make the
call, so no problems here, why? Because we
haven't yet called this fill roll card so
your other bit of coding is over here in game
manager, we need access to a private
score display which is fair enough
architecturally I'm happy that the game
manager has access to a score display
and I said before Ball reset I wanted to
call the method so I need to find the
instance score display equals GameObject
dot find object of type score display
This old chestnut again
and then down here we're just going to
call the instance, score display dot
fill roll card and we're gonna instantly
try and pass in the rolls list. OK, so now
that you're actually making the call to
sorry, it's called pin fall isn't it here. Sorry, I'm passing
the wrong thing in again fill roll
card of course takes in the entire list
not this one pin fall but it takes in the
entire list up here called bowls. ok so third
time lucky and it should compile. OK,
let's take a look let's run the games see
what'sgonna happen. Off it goes to the side, doesn't matter
what you do because once you've done
whatever you're gonna do... messy, you get an
argument is out of range 19 times and
then it's telling us it doesn't know how
to handle the endgame hundreds of times
and then the Swiper if we look at it
over here is just constantly acting on
the balls or at least it's doing it
several times, what a mess. What a mess,
and the games broken right we can't read
you can't play again, we don't
have access to the ball, it's in outer
space... very very broken, so that's fine
I'm taking you here on purpose. Why am I
taking you down into this buggy state?
Because it's going to happen to you in
fact Elija left a fantastic review
recently and one of the things he said
in this review is here don't expect
hand-holding tour of immaculate code
fortress, expect to be dragged repeatedly
through the mud. Just remember they're in
the mud with you until you learn to walk.
So that's what I'm doing, I'm dragging you
through the mud here I made this error in
the prototyping of this section and it's
very valuable to learn how to deal with
this sort of circumstance so what I
want you to do now, I'm going to show you
a quick tool and then I want you to try
and trace this error. The tool I'm gonna
show you is to pause the game when the
error happens, or stop it either one
probably better to pause it coz you
can then resume, and then you can look in
the console you click on an error like
this argument is out of range and then
if you look below you've got the entire
trace know you read this trace from
bottom to top
Pin Counter line 24 Called Pin Counter line
52 called Pin Counter line... etc.
Yeah? You read bottom to top, the same for the other
error. So what I want you to do now is write out
for me on a piece of paper
at least five bullet points as to what
is going wrong here; I want you to make
sure you can understand what's going on.
Use the console trace I've just shown you, write
five-plus bullet points as to what's
going on and then think about how you
may fix it - don't fix it - but let's just
think about how we may fix it and the main
purpose here is for you to get good at
understanding what's going wrong, tracing things
go ahead, pause the video, spend a while on that and try and reason what the hell is happening.
ok welcome back so let's work out what's
going on so firstly we had 19 argument
out of ranges, now if I un-collapse the
console I can check that these were
indeed were all at the beginning, they were. Now
nineteen is sounding quite close to the
number of frames we've got well bowls
rather we've got so its sounding like
something happens like 19, 20 ish times and
then after that it's getting an endgame
OK, so let's start with the very first
error. Let's look at it
Pin Counter line 24 it's called, OK go and let's look at Pin Counter line 24 every update, we're in an update
loop here, every frame which is going to be
probably responsible for the number of
bugs we've got here
errors we've got here, every frame it says if
the ball is out of play which it is we
update the standing count and settle, ok let's
go back to unity. It says we now jump to
line 52 ok 52. Pins have settled. Cos it gets
into this method and remember nothing
went wrong until after 3 seconds and
then suddenly the looping went nuts. So
the pins have settled is being called.
OK, then what happens?
Line 62 here we go. We get into Pins have
settled, it does this stuff and it calls game
manager dot bowl. OK and then where
does it go? Then it goes into game
manager but does it ever come out of game
manager, well because there's a bug I
don't think it does lets verify that
guess, so Debug.Log "I never get here" so
putting a log statement in to say if
you assuming it never gets here because
it calls game manager dot bowl and that
goes wrong, we made it go wrong
remember game manager dot bowl calls
score master fill roll card which errors
out I'm suspecting it never gets here
so that it never updates our standing
count, and the ball never goes out of
play,
and that loop just perpetuates cause when
we get back up here then it says if
the ball's out of play well the ball is
still out of play because it never sets it
to false because it never gets here
OK let's test our hypothesis, run the
game with that Debug statement in, get
back to your error state and then watch
the console. OK now you can collapse the
console and you'll see that you don't have a I
never get here line it just never gets
to this line. OK, so that's what is going on.
So it goes wrong at this point, the pin
counter script every update gets this
far and then bails out ok but it also
every update calls gamea manager. So what
happens to game manager and what game
manager comes through and it gets this
far it calls score display fill roll card
and bails out lets verify that in the
trace game manager goes to line 26 which
is here the one I've got highlighted, and then it goes
in to score display line 22 which is here,
and it's score display line 22 where you get
a few other things go wrong
ending in an argument out of range ok so
think about the execution flow all these
scripts remember occur in...
well you know how the execution order
loops work from earlier in the course, so the
pin counter is executing as far as its
update loop runs and it executes as far as
this line, doesn't go past it so now the
execution flow has got into game manager.
So we get to game manager, we get to this game
this line but we never reset the ball so
that's why the ball isn't getting reset.
You could move, and I suggest you do move
the ball reset up to the top of bowl so
go ahead and do that now, move the ball
reset to the top of bowl in your bowl method
and let's just see how that affects
things. I think we get a roughly similar
problem but at least the problem; at least we'll
reset the ball while the problem happens; that
doesn't make it any better but here
we go, so now we got the ball back here,
we're still getting the same errors but
the reset has happened before the problem
ocurred. So the problem is that this line here in
bowl is erroring out, and just keeps
looping
and it keeps looping for the reason I said,
all the way back to pin counter is the
problem; so we need to make sure that
when pin counter calls game manager
dot bowl that the execution flow
continues and this doesn't error out so
how did you get on with that? This is
what I've written down from my list of
bugs once the ball has entered pin counter
it loops, every frame it calls game manager
dot bowl; pins have settled method never completes,
ball out of play stays true, hence the infinite loop
and game manager's pin fall list fills up
leading to the end game so that nineteen
Bowl thing you get here is because then
after nineteen bowls of whatever we did
say zero in this case the action master is
starting to say well it's the end of the
game now so that's why you get
nineteen of these and then a load of
logs. OK so what I want to talk about briefly is
not fixing it, but I just wanna talk
briefly about how we handle our game
when it goes into an undefined state
obviously these architecturally nasty and
we've got a little bit of spaghettification
going on in that we have the
pin counter calling into the game
manager rather than the other way around
but the purpose of this is to
demonstrate how we can isolate problems
in our code like this. Now it may be
tempting if you know about things like
try / catch which we're going to cover
next, it may be tempting to try and wrap
the offending lines in something like a
try catch, and that's okay in some
circumstances, you could wrap this line
in a try catch and you'll see that that
would allow the execution to continue
but there're different types of error, so
let's just talk about that for a minute.
Your game is going into an undefined state
now. Imagine this only happened one in a
thousand games and it's a shipped game out
on a console and only some scores do this. So
you've got the option of failing hard
versus failing soft and reporting errors,
so some games will do little have
little problems or glitches and they'll just
report an error maybe back to the
developer and then you will just fix it
and maybe some users will never notice.
There are other types of failure where
you just go oh my god, I'm going into an
undefined state like this, we'd better just
kill the game; and that's a pretty nasty
error for a user, the game just quits, but
all games have bugs in them it's just a
question of the consequences of those
bugs and getting through quality control
is just getting the
number of bugs down. So we need to decide
for this score business, you know, how are
we going to deal with it? We can't do
that until we fully identify the error
and got some handle on how often it's
going to happen. So at this stage we know
that it's going to happen every time
because we've made it happen every time.
So we really need to just eliminate the
error; but if we'd identified an error after
shipping that only happens one in a
thousand times then obviously you still
need to fix the error but we want to try
to make the architecture such that we
prevent show-stopping issues from
happening, so that's what we're gonna do in
the next video we're going to talk about
the try catch loop and how we could use
that to say okay this area is happening,
it's only happening occasionally, let's
carry on with our development while
somebody else fixes that
problem and isolates that problem.
OK so that's where we've got to do with
it, and we're gonna move on in a moment
and sort it let me just refactor something while
we're here; this is too many lines pin seter
perform action next action all of
this bumf from the line above, look I could just
take that and just stick it in there
couldn't I? OK, so just do a bit of a refactor
there just for tidiness. Alright,
and then in the next video we'll talk about
catching and dealing with this error. See you soon.